---
author: timofei7
date: '2009-11-09 23:32:21'
layout: post
slug: geopolitical-representations-in-a-networked-world-current-and-future
status: publish
title: 'Geopolitical Representations in a Networked World: current and future'
categories:
- Writing
tags:
- geopolitics
comments: true
sharing: true 
---

They are afraid -- the great firewall of China, the blocking of Facebook in
Pakistan, Bangladesh and others, Iran’s blocking of foreign media and the
eventual temporary internet and text message blackout following 2009
presidential elections (Zuckerman, 2010), these are just a few instances of
how powerful social and citizen media have become and how governments are
attempting to cope with the loss of informational control. In countries where
the press is tightly controlled, citizens, and often foreign media as well,
turn to various self-reporting outlets such as Twitter, Indymedia, YouTube and
other blogging sites. These social media networks allow not only information
to disperse across borders with unprecedented ease (such as the case of Iran’s
bloggers) but also allows cross-scale interaction between transnational actors
and local, previously out-of-sight groups (such as the Mexican Zapatistas)
(Dodds,K., 2007). It has become common to see Twitter and YouTube posts
referenced on various American news outlets as part of their main news
segments (Zuckerman, 2010).

<!--more-->
  
By breaking the traditional boundaries of scale (Glassman, J. 2002) and the
“territorial trap” (Agnew, J., 1994) of geographical state-based social
identity these various technologies are changing the geopolitical landscape.
New media are being used by various actors including politically oppressed
parties, minority ethnic groups, non-governmental organizations and civil
societies across the world for the purposes of collaboration, drawing
attention to causes and issues, and expressing opinion and positions.

The “imagined geographies” of Edward Said, the language and the cultural
expressions used to describe people and places that are ‘other’, have
heretofore defined geopolitical relations. The popular conceptions of what
other places are like, are in essence largely imagined. However untruthful
these representations may be, they do exemplify deeply embedded coded
attitudes about these spaces. It is thus informative to try to understand what
the imagined geographies of various geopolitical actors are and to attempt to
unpack them into the ingrained conceptualizations that a particular culture
has about another. Perhaps in the study of interconnected social networks it
is now possible more than ever before for cultures to be able to see
themselves in the imagined geographies of others. The power and effects of
these media can be captured in several recent events.

**Iran: dissemination and organization**  
When the results were announced after the June 12th Presidential Elections in
Iran as a landslide win for the incumbent Ahmadinejad, there were widespread
protests of election fraud. Iran, with its largely youthful population (almost
seventy-five percent of the population is under 30 (Hamedani, N. 2009)) is
also quite well connected in terms of new media. With 600,000 Facebook users,
more than 400,000 regularly updated blog sites and other Persian-language
social networks, SMS text messaging, one third of the population with access
to internet and two-thirds on mobile phones (Sohrabi-Haghighat, M., Mansouri,
S. 2010), Iranians were able to quickly start a groundswell civic movement in
response to the election results. On June 17th, largely through the use of
Twitter to get the word out, supporters of Mousavi rallied in Tehran. Prior to
this, the Iranian government was already disallowing unfettered access to the
internet, blocking many sites allegedly for pornographic content but also for
political content as well. However in the wake of this unprecedented use of
social media for oppositional organization they took swift action in an
attempt to prevent further use: foreign journalists were forbidden from
reporting and satellite communications were jammed, SMS texting on the mobile
network was disrupted and the internet was throttled to a bare minimum (ibid).
However these efforts were not effective enough and were not quick enough. The
protesters were still able to upload videos of the brutal police repression
and the riots in the streets from their mobile phones and indirectly to
YouTube. At the height of the protests Iran related Twitter tweets came in at
a rate of 15,000 per hour (ibid).

In the foreign media these videos and posts were shown over and over -- in
particular a harrowing mobile phone video of a young woman, Neda Agha-Soltan,
dieing from gunfire on the street. However, the official Iranian government
news attempted to downplay the size of the protests and showed the protesters
to be disruptors of the peace. In the west the main news outlets were eager to
show the grainy and raw seeming video. Without their own journalists on the
ground, they simply broadcast the citizen media. Both because of the sheer
amount of material and the rapidity of events, material was reported without
confirmation. The citizen media had practically taken over foreign news
outlets as well.

This is a remarkable example of the power of decentralized social networks
allowing for the collaboration of protests and, in this instance, the birth of
the “Green Movement” in Iran (Diamond, L. 2010). Demonstrating the larger
geopolitical entanglements between the U.S. and Iran, the U.S. State
Department requested that Twitter postpone a scheduled downtime so as to not
hinder any protest communication (Drezner, D. 2010). Not only was the movement
able to form despite the censure and repression of the Iranian government, but
it was able to continue planning and executing protests for months after the
initial protests, albeit in later stages to mourn for those killed in the
repression rather than to continue the ultimately failed election protests.
Additionally because of the blackout on foreign reporting, internationally the
citizens media was practically the only media, this was an unprecedented event
and, since then, has contributed to many news outlets aggregating citizen
media into their daily news cycles (Zuckerman, E. 2010).

This is only one recent example of the use of new media for dissemination and
organization. In neighboring Iraq new media has been put to a very different
use.

**Iraq: cracking imagined geographies**  
The U.S. Iraq war of 1990-1991 is barely remembered by the younger generations
of Americans. Any dissent that did exist to Desert Shield and Desert Storm is
all but forgotten and buried beneath images of a successful and high-tech
military success. The internet in those days was fledgling and largely
inaccessible to anyone but researchers and military. The majority of Americans
only had traditional mainstream media access through TV or print media.
According to one reporter on the ground in Iraq at the time, the mainstream
media in the U.S. was self-censoring -- only showing anesthetized images and
shielding the public from some of the more horrific aspects of Desert Storm
(Gregory, D. 2004).

The mainstream media for a large part of the Second Gulf War (2003-) has also
been largely pro-American biased and propagating the imagined geography of the
U.S. government. However, now there are more options. Foreign media, including
Al-Jazeera with it’s very different perspective, is readily accessible online.
Additionally, as seen in the case of the Iranian “Twitter Revolution”, citizen
media can be a powerful alternative news source. In the early days of the
Second Gulf War a Pew poll showed that fifty-six percent of internet users in
the U.S. were going to online sources for their information about the war
(Madanmohan Rao 2003). With this war came the major advent of “warblogs.” “The
Iraq War represents a significant online-news milestone. We now have the
content and the infrastructure in place for serious purveyors of Internet news
to call themselves mainstream media [...] it truly is a defining moment”
(ibid, pg. 6).

Warblogs such as Salam Pax, Riverbend, and Juan Cole’s Informed Comment have
attracted millions of readers and eventually resulted in published books and
have been highly regarded and referenced by mainstream media (Drezner, D., &
Farrell, H. 2004). Salam Pax (the Baghdad Blogger) and Riverbend both provided
personal narratives of the war in Iraq from a completely different perspective
than the embedded journalistic establishment. Part of what makes blogs so
effective is that

> “for readers worldwide, blogs can act as the “man on the street,” supplying
unfiltered eyewitness accounts from foreign countries [...] For salient topics
in global affairs, the blogosphere functions as a rare combination of
distributed expertise, real-time collective response to breaking news, and
public- opinion barometer.” (ibid, pg. 3)

What is so different about the Iraqi case from the Iranian bloggers is that
there is no active state suppression of these blogs. Bloggers in Iraq are,
however, limited by the availability and stability of the internet connections
and electrical supply. These are not small hurdles and in many cases can be as
effective at preventing the non-privileged from being heard as active state
censorship.

Blogs allow geopolitical jumping of scale: “the scaling up of social struggles
from local to regional, national, or international” (Glassman, J. 2001). By
allowing voices that would typically go unheard to be heard, blogs allow local
issues to interact with transnational actors which eventually in some cases
can result in political action. They “ allow many online activists to make
direct appeals to the global public sphere, bypassing editorial gatekeepers in
traditional media outlets” (Drezner, D. 2010). For those outside of Iraq, the
ability to see a view from the inside provided by such bloggers as Salam Pax,
unfiltered by the imagined geographies of their own press corps, is essential
to having a more accurate and a more critical geopolitical understanding of
the war. These horizontal lines of communication enable transnational civil
societies which can in turn effect geopolitical outcomes.

**Others and Caveats**  
There are many cases of new media being effective in bringing about action.
Whether it is the ultimate release of the imprisoned Iranian blogger Sina
Motallebi through the “boomerang effect” (Drezner, D., & Farrell, H. 2004), or
the planning, execution and Indymedia reporting of the Battle of Seattle
(Juris, J. 2005), or the coordination of the “Orange Revolution” in the
Ukraine in 2004 (Drezner, D, & Farrell, H. 2004), or the Zapatistas in Mexico
jumping scale and eliciting international funding for their cause (Juris, J.
2005), or the organization of the Philippine EDSA Revolution in 2001 leading
to the overthrow of then President Joseph Estrada, all these cases are enabled
by social media.

There are also cases where the new media networks have helped the spread of
information and “alternate” viewpoints and have influenced civil societies.
These include the Iraqi bloggers attempts at changing public opinion in the
western world and the spread of information about the Saffron Revolution in
Burma in 2007 (Diamond, L. 2010) with the effect of bringing international
attention, sanctions and international protest movements organized through
Facebook. It may appear that social media is a power for “good” and that the
further spread of these technologies will only benefit global society. However
there are many caveats that are often overlooked. To date these technologies
are still largely dominated by the developed world. Access remains a challenge
in many parts of the globe. As with any technology, infrastructure needs to be
built. What differentiates the internet from older media technologies is that
it is decentralized and infrastructure can be built up in a somewhat piecemeal
fashion. Censorship in repressive regimes is a bigger concern. China has one
of the most well developed internet censorship infrastructures:

> Fifty-thousand Internet police prowl cyberspace removing “harmful
content”—usually within 24 to 48 hours. Students are recruited to spy on their
fellows. And the regime pays a quarter of a million online hacks (called
“50-centers” because of the low piece rate they get) to post favorable
comments about the party- state and report negative comments. (Diamond, L.
2010, pg. 74)

This is in addition to limiting access, imposing regulations requiring the use
of real names in blogs, and going so far as to, during times of crisis, simply
shut off all access completely. In countries where internet access is mostly
government controlled (such as in North Korea) this can certainly hinder
coordination attempts during times of political upheaval. For instance, the
Chinese government blocked local internet access during the 2008 Tibet
protests (ibid). Access even to such a decentralized resource as the internet
is uneven across the globe, however under any repression there will be
attempts to circumvent access controls and censorship. In Iran, for instance,
people used Tor, an open network relay to allow anonymous access to blog sites
through a number of relay points.

Governments are also using social media for their own purposes and for the
purposes of repressing the very freedoms of expression that social media is
allowing in their citizens. In Iran the government used the same social
networks to identify and arrest Green Revolution leaders. In Belarus in 2007
“smart mob” protests were thwarted by government monitoring of LiveJournal
blog sites. As one Belarusian commentator wrote, “Social media created a
digital panopticon that thwarted the revolution; [it was] infiltrated and
hopelessly outgunned by the power of the state...The emergence of new digital
spaces for dissent also lead to new ways of tracking it” (Drezner, D. 2010, pg
36). This of course works both ways in a virtual media race.

However, new media use is not limited to governments and “good” civil
societies. Other non-state actors, such as terrorist organizations, can use
these same technologies just as effectively. Cell phones were used during the
9/11 terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center in the final stages of
coordination, but other technologies are also employed for the purposes of
terror. Mexican drug cartels post YouTube videos of killings as warnings
(ibid). Hacktivism is closely related to cyber-terrorism and can be used by
governments and non-humanitarian groups just as easily. In the Mumbai attacks
of 2008 mobile phones, Google Earth and various other technologies were used
to plan and coordinate the attacks (Kaplan, C. 2009)

**Thoughts**  
As we can see, the interconnected and decentralized new media networks are
powerful tools. There have been studies done of the effects of decentralized
social networks in terms of geopolitics and global civil society, however not
as much work has been done on the analysis of the content of the citizen media
for the purposes of breaking through imagined geographies. As of 2010,
BlogPulse reports that there are more than 144 million blog sites. Because the
the interconnected nature of blogs (bloggers will often link to posts in other
blogs) a hierarchy of blogs develops, with a trickle up effect of opinion from
smaller blogs up toward bigger blogs with more readership (Drezner, D, &
Farrell, H. 2004). The blog hierarchy aggregates public opinion (at least the
opinion of the online public) and presents it to the rest of the world. The
opinions may be biased, one-sided and ignorant, however, they are reflecting
of a side of societies that before now has gone unheard or has been repressed.
Individual issues have been analysed with the help of online media, such as a
study of nationalism in Zambia reflected in an online community (Fergusun, J.
2003). However there do not appear to be any broad spectrum analyses of online
public thoughts.

Mainstream media in the U.S. is starting to incorporate “Elite” blogs, Tweets,
and some rudimentary opinion representation from social networks, however this
is an unscientific endeavour and is tainted with selection bias. Aggregator
sites allow people to submit links to articles and posts and to vote on them
(Zuckerman, E. 2010). These sites have become quite popular and allow an
easier navigation of the otherwise unnavigable chaos of online opinion.

What does not exist however is a visualization tool providing a global
geopolitical opinion survey. There are some attempts at building tag clouds
from the top topics being discussed, but usually these are limited to English
language blogs only and do not provide an interesting metric. However a tool
that allowed a geographic analysis of local voices has the potential of
opening this world to a much broader audience. If it were possible to analyze
the blogs and comments and social media of various areas, grouping them
together and then geolocating them onto a map allowing for the browsing of
issues and opinion. Additionally the ability to search for specific targets of
opinion would be essential. For instance, searching for America would show the
opinions related in the blogs from various geographic areas. This sort of
visualization could be a useful tool in combating the imagined geographies
that have continued to define and drive conflict throughout the world.

________________ 

References 

Agnew, J. (1994). The territorial trap: The
geographical assumptions of international relations theory. Review of
International Political Economy, 1(1), 53-80. doi:10.1080/09692299408434268
Brunn, S. D., Cottle C. D. (1997). 

Small States and Cyberboosterism.
Geographical Review, 87(2), 240-258. doi:10.1111/j.1931-0846.1997.tb00073.x
Diamond, L. (2010). Liberation technology. Journal of Democracy 21(3), 69-83.
Retrieved July 20, 2010, from Project MUSE database. Dodds, K. (2007).


Geopolitics: A very short introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Drezner, D.W. (05/01/2010). 

"Weighing the Scales: The Internet's Effect On
State-Society Relations.". The Brown journal of world affairs(1080-0786), 16
(2), p. 31. Drezner, D., & Farrell, H. (2004). 

Web of Influence. Foreign
Policy, (145), 32-40. Retrieved from MasterFILE Select database. Glassman, J.
(2002). 

"From Seattle (and Ubon) to Bangkok: the scales of resistance to
corporate globalization". Environment and planning. D, Society & space
(0263-7758), 20 (5), p. 513. Hamedani, N. (2009). 

"The World Is Watching"...a
Blurry Picture in Iran. The Washington Report on Middle East Affairs, 28(6),
11-13,16. Retrieved August 12, 2010, from Research Library. (Document ID:
1875867041). Häkli, J. (2001). 

In the territory of knowledge: state-centred
discourses and the construction of society. Progress in Human Geography,
25(3), 403-422. Retrieved August 12, 2010, from Research Library. (Document
ID: 1082224611). Juris, J. S. (2005). 

The new digital media and activist
networking within anti-corporate globalization movements. Annals of the
American Academy of Political and Social Science, 597(, Cultural Production in
a Digital Age), 189-208. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/25046069
Kaplan, C. (2009-12). 

"The Biopolitics of Technoculture in the Mumbai
Attacks". Theory, culture & society (0263-2764), 26 (7-8), p. 301. Lithgow,
M.. (2007, October). The cultures of citizenship: Exploring the ties between
media literacy, blogging and democracy. Our Schools, Our Selves, 17(1),
177-189. Retrieved August 13, 2010, from CBCA Complete. (Document ID:
1385429291). Madanmohan Rao. (2003, January). 

New Media: Countering US
Mainstream Media Views in Iraq War I and Iraq War II. Media Asia, 30(3),
133-137. Retrieved August 13, 2010, from ProQuest Asian Business and
Reference. (Document ID: 548340201). Sohrabi-Haghighat, M., Mansouri, S.
(2010). 

'WHERE IS MY VOTE?' ICT Politics in the Aftermath of Iran's
Presidential Election. International Journal of Emerging Technologies and
Society, 8(1), 24-41. Retrieved August 12, 2010, from ABI/INFORM Global.
(Document ID: 2082649231). Zuckerman, E.. (2010). 

International reporting in
the age of participatory media. Daedalus, 139(2), 66-75,154. Retrieved August
12, 2010, from Research Library. (Document ID: 2024538961).

