---
author: timofei7
date: '2010-04-30 01:33:47'
layout: post
slug: why-the-dlpfc-is-the-coolest-part-of-the-brain
status: publish
title: why the DLPFC is the coolest part of the brain
categories:
- Writing
tags:
- brain
comments: true
sharing: true 

---

want to learn about why the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is the coolest part
of the brain?

<!--more-->
  
**The DLPFC**  
With the onset of modern neuroscience a common question often discussed is:
where in the brain are self-regulation, executive control, free will,
volition, selection, short-term memory, attention, planning, and overall
consciousness located and by what neurological processes do they occur. The
prime brain areas that is thought to be responsible are the frontal lobes.
However a problem is presented when studying this area in humans: comparison
to monkey's brains has been difficult as the PFC, prefrontal cortex, is
structured somewhat differently (Petrides, M., Pandya, D.N., 1999 and Fuster,
J. M., 2008. pg. 21) and thus comparisons can be complicated, and invasive
techniques are largely limited to non-humans. Lesion studies have sometimes
led to seemingly contradicting results that are hotly debated. However
researchers agree that the prefrontal cortex as a whole is the essential area
responsible for higher behavioral functions. One of the essential brain areas
associated with these psychological processes is the DLPFC, dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex. This area appears to be critical for working memory,
planning, selective attention, temporal integration and volition.

**Location and Structure**  
The DLPFC is located in the middle frontal gyrus and is typically defined
cytoarchitectonicaly as Brodmann areas 46 and 9 (Berntson, G. G., & Cacioppo,
J. T., 2009, pg. 586). BA8 is also sometimes considered the posterior DLPFC or
simply adjacent to it (Miller, Earl K., Cohen, Jonathan D., 2001, pg. 169).
The DLPFC is one of the last areas in humans to develop and myelinate as the
brain myelinates back to front (Fuster, J. M., 2008. pg. 15).

C**onnections**

A critical aspect of the DLPFC is that it is extraordinarily interconnected
with other brain areas and is the most connected of all the PFC areas. It is
connected to sensory and motor cortexes as well as interconnected with other
PFC areas.

**Sensory Cortex Connections**  
BA46 and BA9 have connections to the visual, somatosensory and auditory
projections via the occipital, parietal and temporal cortices. Both areas are
also connected to the multimodal rostral superior temporal sulcus with neurons
responding to multi-sensory inputs. (Miller, Earl K., Cohen, Jonathan D.,
2001). The posterior parietal cortex in particular plays a large role in that
it is both a mutli-modal area and is related to spatial working memory,
attention. It has also been implicated in having a role in intention (Libet et
al, 1999).

**Motor Cortex Connections**  
BA46 is particularly connected to pre-motor areas; it has connections to the
SMA, the pSMA, the rostral cingulate, the lateral frontal pre-motor cortex and
to the cerebellum and superior colliculus ( Miller, E. K., Cohen, J. D., 2001.
pg. 175). BA46 also sends projections to the BA8 frontal eye fields and
indirectly receives inputs, along with the all of the prefrontal cortex, from
the basal ganglia (pg. 175).

**Prefrontal Interconnections**  
All of the prefrontal areas are interconnected to a large degree. BA46 and BA9
are both connected to the orbital and medial prefrontal areas (BA 10,
11,13,14) as well as to each other. BA9 is connected to the ventrolateral
areas (BA 12,45). BA8 connects to BA46. These interconnections not only allow
indirect communication to other systems that are connected to other prefrontal
areas (such as the limbic system through the medial PFC areas), but also
provides a way for disperse systems to be indirectly wired together through
this central area. The convergence of cortico-cortical pathways suggests that
part of the DLPFC's operation is as a cross-modal area of association (Fuster,
J. M., 2008. pg. 34).

**Experimental Connections**  
An experiment that supports this prefrontal interconnectedness theory (Tomita
et al, 2001) studied top-down communication from the prefrontal cortex to the
inferior temporal cortex (which has been shown to store long-term visual
memories (Miyashita, Y., 1993)). The inferior temporal cortex receives visual
input contra-laterally from the occipital lobe and the two sides are sub-
cortically connected. In this experiment two monkeys were given split visual
stimuli and were trained to associate certain cues with categories of stimuli.
Then the connection between the inferior temporal cortices was severed -- to
theoretically prevent a cue presented to the ipsilateral side (the side that
did not see the choice) from activating a category recall on the contralateral
side. The bottom-up condition was when both the cue and the choice were
offered to the same contralateral vision field, and the top-down condition was
when the cue was offered on the ipsilateral side while the choice was offered
on the contralateral side. The results, measured via single neuron recordings,
showed that when the direct connection between the sides of the inferior
temporal lobe was severed there was a delay in recall but that the ipsilateral
side never-the-less showed correct activation. This experiment suggests that
the visual information travelled through the prefrontal cortex connections. To
confirm this finding the connections to the prefrontal cortex from the
inferior temporal cortex lobes were severed and only then did the monkeys fail
the task.

**Functionality**  
Given the strong interconnectedness of all the prefrontal areas, it is no
surprise that a compartmentalization of each cytoarchitectonic area would be
an oversimplification (Fuster, J. M., 2008. pg. 6). All these areas work
together to achieve its various executive functions. However, these areas do
have discernable specializations and the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in
particular has a number of fortes including basic working memory, cross-
temporal/modal integration, temporal ordering, planning, acting and rule
encoding, selective attention, will and volition.

**Working Memory**  
It is commonly agreed that the lateral prefrontal cortex plays a large role in
working memory (Curtis, C. E, D'Esposito, M., 2004). However, precisely how it
works and what role the DLPFC plays in it is disputed. Special types of
neurons called memory neurons are certainly necessary if not sufficient.
Memory neurons are neurons that in a delay task appear to activate during the
delay period between a presentation and a recall of a stimuli. Some activate
during the stimulus, others right after, and even others stay active for a
while. The DLPFC has more memory neurons than any other prefrontal area
(Fuster, J. M., 2008. pg. 247). As a side note, the Frontal Eye Fields -- area
8 -- contains memory cells that are particularly attuned for eye saccades to
cued locations, whereas in areas 46 and 9 there is some evidence for memory
neuron specialization toward spatial tasks. There are however memory neurons
in many other areas of the brain, including the thalamus, inferotemporal
cortex and basal ganglia, but those memory neurons appear to be specialized
toward the sensory task of the particular area, whereas in the prefrontal
cortex the memory neurons are more multi-modal. The simple existence of memory
neurons is not enough to show the DLPFC's role in working memory.

Working memory as a function of the DLPFC has been primarily shown via delay
tasks with either lesion patients or appropriately trained animals with
ablations/lesions or reversible lesions via cooling. Commonly a delay task
will begin with the representation of a cue. The cue informs the participant
about a choice that is to be made later (usually the location of a salient
item such as food). Then the cue is covered up for some amount of time: the
delay period. Following this a choice is presented -- the correct choice being
informed by the cue presented prior to the delay. In many studies of animals,
when the delay is non-existent or very short, the DLPFC lesioned animals
perform normally, but as the delay increases so success at the task drops
(Fuster, J. M., 2008. pg. 144). Similar tasks however that do not have any
spatial element have shown no difference in some experiments.

These lesion studies lead to the theory that the DLPFC is particularly
important for spatial working memory. However there remain questions as to
what role the DLPFC plays in working memory. The interconnectedness of the
DLPFC plays a vital role in its working memory functionality. A study of the
interaction of the DLPFC and other brain areas (Fuster, J. M., Bauer, R. H., &
Jervey, J. P., 1985) shows working memory to be more than a few memory neurons
but a distributed representational network encompassing many brain areas. In
particular it reveals the DLPFC as a top-down moderator of "online" working
memory tasks. The study used a Peltier chip to cool down the DLPFC and the
inferotemporal cortex in turn. Single neuron recording was used to record the
activity of memory neurons sensitive to certain colors in the inferotemporal
cortex. The monkeys were trained in a color match delay task. As they
performed the task the color sensitive neurons in the inferotemporal cortex
would activate on the working memory of the cue color. However, when the DLPFC
was cooled the firing rate of the inferotemporal neurons related to the
working memory of the task would attenuate and the animal, additionally, would
not be able to perform the task. This suggests a modulation effect from the
DLPFC to the inferotemporal cortex, where the sensory memory for this
particular task was represented, at least in part. This experiment was also
performed in reverse: the inferotemporal cortex cooled and the DLPFC activity
measured during the same delay task. The results were very similar: there was
a modulation effect in addition to lowered task performance. Fuster makes the
supposition that the model for working memory is that of,

> "a frontal substrate of executive memory cooperating with other brain
structures, cortical and subcortical, for the maintenance of working memory.
The function of working memory would be distributed, much as its neural
substrate, albeit under a degree of prefrontal executive -- or 'top-down'
--control." (Fuster, J. M., 2008. pg. 251)

Reverberating reentry is the method by which these cortico-cortical/cortico-
subcortical memory loops are maintained neurologically (pg. 252). Projections
to and from posterior sensory cortices and the DLPFC reverberate back and
forth, each moderating and resubmitting the memory back into the loop as
needed. The theory outlined by Fuster (pg. 296) is that the DLPFC is involved
in the selection and maintenance of working memory and that the
representational aspect of any particular memory requires the brain areas
which are specialized to the sensory features of that memory.

There have been many PET and fMRI studies that have localized spatial working
memory to the DLPFC especially in monkeys, however in human studies not only
has it been harder to pinpoint some studies seem to suggest that the DLPF's
role is quite more elaborate and involved.

**Cross-Temporal Integration**  
It has already been demonstrated that the DLPFC has a particular importance in
temporal integration. Simple recognition tasks without a delay do not appear
to trigger the DLPFC. Additionally, as already mentioned, the greater the
delay the more a DLPFC lesion causes impairment. Several studies show DLPFC
lesioned monkeys

> "deficient at tasks in which temporal frequency, temporal order, or temporal
sequence is of the essence. [..] The dorsolateral prefrontal cortex seems most
important for the mediation of the cross-temporal contingencies, as delay
tasks require" (Fuster, J. M., 2008. pg. 145).

This is not surprising as working memory is an essential component of
temporally organizing cognition and behavior.

**Cross-Modal Integration **  
Much of the DLPFC's functionality can be attributed to how interconnected it
is. This interconnectedness however not only enables cross-temporal
integration but also cross-modal integration -- neurons that receive
projections from multiple sensory areas are the mechanism behind this.

Fuster demonstrated cross-modal integration with a single neuron recording
study performed on monkeys (Fuster, J. M., 2008. pg. 226). The monkeys were
trained to associate an auditory tone with a particular visual stimuli -- in
this case a color. The experiment first presented the animal with the auditory
cue and then after a delay presented two colors buttons -- the animal would
need to choose the correct one that corresponded with the learned association.
Single cell neurons were recorded in the DLPFC that responded both to the
auditory cue and to the color. Thus the sensory rule for the experimental
condition was encoded in a multi-modal association. This is a precursor to the
rule encoding functionality that the DLPFC is implicated in as well.

**Planning, Acting and Rule Encoding**  
The DLPFC is essential to the "ability to maintain any memory, recent or
remote, in the active state for the prospective performance of a goal-directed
act" (Fuster, J. M., 2008. pg. 146). Performance of a goal directed act
requires planning for the act and acting on in the plan. Related to this is
the ability to encode the rules that may be required for the task. The
beginnings of rule encoding are in the cross-modal associative abilities of
the DLPFC.

A recent study showed that even abstract mathematical rules can be encoded in
the DLPFC (Bongard, S., & Nieder, A., 2010). The monkeys were trained to
distinguish numerosities with greater and less than rules. The stimuli were
varied and so the monkeys were unable to build concrete associative relations
between specific numbers. Using single cell recordings the study found that
there were neurons that fired specifically when a rule-indicating cue appeared
and during the application of that specific rule. The suggestion here is not
that numerosity itself is encoded in the DLPFC rather only the selection of
choosing greater or less than as rules for executive control. Numerosity
itself is a function of the posterior parietal cortex. It is also important to
note that the DLPFC abstracts rules only when the task surpasses some basic
difficulty.

White and Wise in a 1999 study showed that DLPFC neurons were involved in
rules involving both spatial and non-spatial cues with specific eye movements
and hand gestures. As in many of these sorts of studies, using single cell
recording, they found a significant number of neurons that were selective for
changing rules and applying them.

Planning is a task that is commonly associated with the prefrontal cortex in
general, but also with the DLPC in particular. A study by Morris et al in 1993
showed DLPFC activation during the tower of london task. The tower of london
is a task design to test logical planning ability and is similar to the towers
of hanoi puzzle. A common lay association with planning is internal silent
speech. A study by Ryding et al in 1996 showed DLPFC activation during silent
counting but not during counting aloud. The study attributes this activation
to the attentional component of counting internally, although it is not
obvious why there is a difference between the two in terms of attention.
Slightly more modern theories of the DLPFC may attribute this activation to
the selective goal of speaking internally or to the monitoring needs of the
feedback loop given the lack of audible feedback.

**Selective Attention and Monitoring**  
If the DLPFC helps to maintain goal related working memory, does it also
participate in the selection and attentional aspects related to the goal as
well? An fMRI study by D'Esposito et al in 1995 seems to indicate that this
may be the case. The experiment consisted of two tasks, a spatial-rotation
task and a semantic-judgement task. When performed singly neither task
required working memory and thus did not show any DLPFC activation. However
when the tasks were to be performed simultaneously (sequentially but rapidly)
the DLPFC showed significant activation.

Hare et al (2009) showed that goal related decisions require DLPFC modulation
of a value signal provided/computed by the VMPFC. DLPFC activity increased in
subjects during successful self-control trails involving choosing healthy over
unhealthy-but-liked food. The experimenters suggest that this result helps
confirm the theory that the DLPFC acts via its connections to other brain
areas to promote goal-oriented behavior.

The DLPFC has also been shown to be activated when a task requires higher
levels of monitoring. The silent counting experiment by Ryding shows this to
some degree. Another set of tasks that shows DLPFC involvement are self-
ordered tasks. In these tasks the subject is shown a set of stimuli and then
is asked self-order them. This requires the subject to keep the memory of
which items have been selected and which have not been selected yet in working
memory and requires them to monitor those memories as they choose objects.
Petrides showed that self-ordered tasks involved DLPFC activation while
externally-ordered tasks did not (2000). Additionally he showed that the more
items were involved in the task the higher the activation regardless of
whether the stimuli were spatial or not. This result seems to indicate that
monitoring is an additional feature of the DLPFC.

**Will and Volition**  
Given the DLPFC's role in so many aspects of "executive control" perhaps it
also has a role in the voluntary choice of actions that is so tightly
associated with the concept of consciousness.

> "Damage in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in humans leads to a lack of
spontaneous activity, distractibility by environmental cues, and the
repetitive, stereotypic use of inappropriate behavioral responses
(perseveration). These phenomena may indicate an inability to choose or
initiate the correct course of action." (Freeman, A., Libet, B., & Sutherland,
K., 1999 pg. 16).

Frith defines the actual act of such choosing as "a deliberate selection
[that] is subjectively experienced as willed and occurs when we have a choice
of action. [These] spontaneous or self-generated actions are not specified by
an external trigger stimulus, but are internally driven." (Frith et al, 1991).
One of the main findings on volition and the DLPFC is his PET study of word
generation and finger movements.

The word generation experiment consists of 3 conditions: in the first the
subject hears a list of random words and repeats each word. In the second the
subject hears words that have unambiguous opposites and must say out loud the
opposite words. The final third condition the subject hears the word "next"
and must choose a word that starts with a preset letter. The idea is that the
first two conditions are "externally specified" (Frith et al, 1991); the word
to repeat is unambiguous and no choice exists. In the third condition however
the subject must pick a word. The PET scans showed no difference in rCBF
between the first two "externally specified" conditions while the third
condition showed increased left DLPFC rCBF.

The finger movement part of the experiment had similar results (although rCBF
was increased bilaterally in the finger condition). The conditions were
similar: in the first the subject had one of two fingers tapped and they had
to raise that same finger in response, in the second they had to raise the
opposite, and in the third free-willed condition they had to choose which
finger to raise.

One problem with the word generation part of this experiment is that there is
a small working memory component -- that of keeping the already stated
previous word in mind. However, a later study by Desmond et al in 1998,
changed the condition to involve no working memory by simply giving the
participant different word stems that required choice of completions on each
trail. This study had similar results except with fMRI. Further studies by
Libet and Jahanshahi showed that temporal choice about when to make the
movement also activated the DLPFC (Freeman, A., Libet, B., & Sutherland, K.,
1999 pg. 19).

However the DLPFC, as has been previously mentioned, does not act alone in any
of this. In each of these tasks the DLPFC worked with other brain areas by
virtue of its interconnectedness (Freeman, A., Libet, B., & Sutherland, K.,
1999 pg. 20). The conclusion may be that the DLPFC "plays a role in the
selection of action, [but] the performance of the action itself is facilitated
by 'lower' motor regions, such as SMA and basal ganglia" (pg. 21). And
furthermore, the "DLPFC seems to be involved in keeping possible action in
mind before they are executed, and selecting which one will be performed" (pg.
27).

**Disorders and Lesions**  
What role does the DLPFC play in human disorders? Lesions of the DLPFC
contribute to a myriad of symptoms including: lack of drive and awareness
(selective attention suppressed), visuospatial neglect (FEF damage), "frontal
dynamic aphasia": reduced verbal production quality, apathy and "dysexecutive
syndrome" leading to being "incapacitated in initiating spontaneous and
deliberate action" (Fuster, J. M., 2008. pg. 198). Working memory deficits
contribute to a myriad of failures upstream including in action selection,
temporal integration, and goal oriented planning. The DLPFC is also implicated
in several neurological disorders.

**Schizophrenia**  
Schizophrenia is commonly marked by such symptoms as poor speech, temporal
integration problems, hallucinations and lack of volitional control. A study
by Weinberger et al in 1986 showed via a PET scan study that there was a lack
of appropriate increase in DLPFC activity in schizophrenia patients while
performing the Wisconsin card sorting task, which has been shown many times to
elicit DLPFC activation. This study was later expanded on in 2002 by Meyer-
Lindenberg et al to not only using PET to study rCBF during the WCST but also
presynaptic dopamine. Their study showed an inverse correlation with reduced
DLPFC activation and increased striatal 6-FD uptake, leading to the conclusion
that dopaminergic transmission dysfunction in schizophrenia may be DLPFC
related. Since schizophrenia is characterized by, "the failure to construct
logically coherent temporal configurations (gestalts) of thought -- and
consequently of speech and behavior" (Fuster, J. M., 2008. pg. 313) -- that
precisely implicates the DLPFC in terms of working memory and temporal
integration problems.

**Conclusions**  
A summary of DLPFC working memory involvement is provided by D'Esposito et al:

> When the amount of to-be-remembered information presented at the beginning
of a delayed-response trial approaches or exceeds short-term memory capacity
[...], dorsolateral PFC is preferentially engaged. Dorsolateral PFC-supported
processes may facilitate the efficient encoding of information. During the
subsequent delay interval, when no information is accessible to the subject,
both ventro- and dorsolateral PFC are recruited. If manipulation of this
information is additionally required during the delay period, dorsolateral PFC
is recruited to an additional extent. Upon the presentation of the probe
stimulus, when a subject is required to make a response based on what was
presented at the beginning of the trial, dorsolateral PFC is again engaged,
presumably as the subject scans the information that was retained across the
trial and chooses an appropriate motor response. [...] Together, the results
of these studies highlight the temporal dynamics of PFC function during
working memory task performance. (2000)

However it is obvious from the DLPFC's involvement in selection and planning
and volition that its function cannot be limited to only working memory.
Selective attention is at the most basic level attention to internal
representations. These internal representations are maintained by working
memory and thus these two are closely related. Additionally planning involves
attention to future possibilities, what Ingvar (1985) called "memory of the
future", and is thus also closely related to working memory. It appears that
although there is no cohesive theory for the DLPFC, a general sense could be
that all things DLPFC are related to temporal integration across multiple
sensory modes. The interconnectedness of the DLPFC is its defining
characteristic. 

________________


**References:** 

Boller, F., Grafman, J., & Holyoak, K. J. (1995). Structure and functions of the human prefrontal cortex. New York: New York Academy of Sciences. Bongard, S., & Nieder, A. (2010). 

Basic mathematical rules are encoded by primate prefrontal cortex neurons. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(5), 2277-2282. doi:10.1073/pnas.0909180107 Curtis, C. E., & D'Esposito, M. (2004). 

The effects of prefrontal lesions on working memory performance and theory. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 4(4), 528-539. Retrieved from http://cabn.psychonomic-journals.org/content/4/4/528.abstract Desmond, J. E., Gabrieli, J. D. E., & Glover, G. H. (1998). 

Dissociation of frontal and cerebellar activity in a cognitive task: Evidence for a distinction between selection and search. NeuroImage, 7(4), 368-376. Retrieved from http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6WNP-45M2XYH-W/2/bf49e4719a18fb7a65ba16cf0b5d3547 D'Esposito, M., Detre, J. A., Alsop, D. C., Shin, R. K., Atlas, S., & Grossman, M. (1995). 

The neural basis of the central executive system of working memory. Nature, 378(6554), 279-281. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/378279a0 D'Esposito, M., Postle, B. R., & Rypma, B. (2000). 

Prefrontal cortical contributions to working memory: Evidence from event-related fMRI studies.. Experimental Brain Research, 133(1), 3-11. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s002210000395 D'Esposito, M., (2003). 

Neurological foundations of cognitive neuroscience. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Retrieved from http://www.netLibrary.com/urlapi.asp?action=summary&v=1&bookid=78182 Freeman, A., Libet, B., & Sutherland, K. (1999). 

The volitional brain :Towards a neuroscience of free will. Thorverton: Imprint Academic. Freeman, A., Libet, B., & Sutherland, K. (1999). 

The volitional brain :Towards a neuroscience of free will. Thorverton: Imprint Academic. Frith, C. D., Friston, K., Liddle, P. F., & Frackowiak, R. S. J. (1991). 

Willed action and the prefrontal cortex in man: A study with PET. Proceedings: Biological Sciences, 244(1311), 241-246. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/76606 Fuster, J. M. (2008). 

The prefrontal cortex (4th ed.). Amsterdam; Boston: Academic Press/Elsevier. Fuster, J. M., Bauer, R. H., & Jervey, J. P. (1985). 

Functional interactions between inferotemporal and prefrontal cortex in a cognitive task. Brain Research, 330(2), 299-307. doi:DOI: 10.1016/0006-8993(85)90689-4 Gathercole, S. E. (1999). Cognitive approaches to the development of short-term memory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 3(11), 410-419. doi:DOI: 10.1016/S1364-6613(99)01388-1 Hare, T. A., Camerer, C. F., & Rangel, A. (2009). 

Self-control in decision-making involves modulation of the vmPFC valuation system. Science, 324(5927), 646-648. doi:10.1126/science.1168450 Hoshi, E. (2006). 

Functional specialization within the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex: A review of anatomical and physiological studies of non-human primates. Neuroscience Research, 54(2), 73-84. doi:DOI: 10.1016/j.neures.2005.10.013 Meyer-Lindenberg, A., Miletich, R. S., Kohn, P. D., Esposito, G., Carson, R. E., Quarantelli, M., et al. (2002). 

Reduced prefrontal activity predicts exaggerated striatal dopaminergic function in schizophrenia. Nature Neuroscience, 5(3), 267-271. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nn804 Miller, E. K., & Cohen, J. D. (2001). 

An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex function. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 24(1), 167-202. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.24.1.167 Miyashita, Y. (1993).

Inferior temporal cortex: Where visual perception meets memory. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 16(1), 245-263. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.ne.16.030193.001333 Morris, R. G., Ahmed, S., Syed, G. M., & Toone, B. K. (1993). 

Neural correlates of planning ability: Frontal lobe activation during the tower of london test. Neuropsychologia, 31(12), 1367-1378. doi:DOI: 10.1016/0028-3932(93)90104-8 Petrides, M., & Pandya, D. N. (1999). 

Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex: Comparative cytoarchitectonic analysis in the human and the macaque brain and corticocortical connection patterns. European Journal of Neuroscience, 11(3), 1011. doi:10.1046/j.1460-9568.1999.00518.x Petrides, M. (2000). 

The role of the mid-dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in working memory. Experimental Brain Research, 133(1), 44-54. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s002210000399 Rossi, A., Pessoa, L., Desimone, R., & Ungerleider, L. (2009). 

The prefrontal cortex and the executive control of attention. Experimental Brain Research, 192(3), 489-497. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00221-008-1642-z Ryding, E., BraÅdvik, B., & Ingvar, D. H. (1996). 

Silent speech activates prefrontal cortical regions asymmetrically, as well as speech-related areas in the dominant hemisphere. Brain and Language, 52(3), 435-451. doi:DOI: 10.1006/brln.1996.0023 Singh, J., & Knight, R. T. (1990). 

Frontal lobe contribution to voluntary movements in humans. Brain Research, 531(1-2), 45-54. doi:DOI: 10.1016/0006-8993(90)90756-2 Tanji, J., & Hoshi, E. (2008). 

Role of the lateral prefrontal cortex in executive behavioral control. Physiological Reviews, 88(1), 37-57. doi:10.1152/physrev.00014.2007 Tomita, H., Ohbayashi, M., Nakahara, K., Hasegawa, I., & Miyashita, Y. (1999). 

Top-down signal from prefrontal cortex in executive control of memory retrieval. Nature, 401(6754), 699-703. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/44372 Weinberger, D. R., Berman, K. F., Zec, R. F., & National Institute of Mental Health. (1986; 1986).

Physiologic dysfunction of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia. Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Mental Health. White, I. M., & Wise, S. P. (1999). 

Rule-dependent neuronal activity in the prefrontal cortex. Experimental Brain Research, 126(3), 315-335. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s002210050740

