---
author: timofei7
date: '2010-03-11 22:10:37'
layout: post
slug: flow-education-and-ritalin-the-missing-link-between-addiction-and-learning
status: publish
title: 'Flow, Education, and Ritalin: The Missing Link Between Addiction And Learning'
categories:
- Writing
tags:
- education
comments: true
sharing: true 

---

**Flow, Education, and Ritalin**  
My eyes are glued to the screen. They rarely blink. They become irritated but
I do not notice. I am in the zone. The force is with me. I feel it flow
through me. I am coding. Even though the coding paradigm may not apply to
everyone, we all know that feeling of hyper-attention. When an activity is so
engrossing that the rest of the world fades away, we are left mano-a-mano,
tête-à-tête, our ego and the task battling together for mutual gain.

<!--more-->
  
In positive psychology the term coined by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi to describe
this is "flow". In his seminal work on flow, Csikszentmihalyi uses various
experiential self-report methods to study flow, and he has found some key
techniques that can help in achieving this state. However, he does not mention
the biological mechanisms behind flow. Examining this connection leads to some
interesting findings. If the brain functions during a state of flow include
the brain's attention pathways, then this likely implicates dopamine as one of
the brain chemicals through which flow is experienced. Dopamine is in part not
only responsible for regulating attention but is also the primary
neurotransmitter of reward. Is flow then a state of constant dopamine rush--a
stream of attention and reward causing a physical high? This would explain the
addictive nature of flow. Additionally we could then draw further powerful
conclusions about the utility of flow in our lives. Specifically a
relationship between flow and dopamine suggests further directions of research
relating flow to Ritalin and education. There are thus three main topics to
address in attempting to make a case that more research into this area would
be indispensable:

  1. What are the cognitive pathways involved in flow?
  2. Is dopamine the cause of flow?
  3. Is education a practical application for flow theory?
Understanding how flow happens and how it relates to attention and reward can
be potentially useful in developing new techniques for learning and also can
have broader significance such as in finding non-drug based treatments for
attention disorders.

**What are the cognitive pathways involved in flow?**  
Csikszentmihalyi (1990) defines flow as "an intrinsically motivated, task-
focused state characterized by full concentration, a change in the awareness
of time (e.g., time passing quickly), feelings of clarity and control, a
merging of action and awareness, and a lack of self-consciousness". He claims
that there are eight contributing factors to this feeling (p.49):

  1.  A challenging activity which requires skills
  2.  The ability to concentrate on the task
  3. The task has clear goals
  4. There is immediate feedback
  5. There is deep involvement in the task
  6. There is a perception of control
  7.  Sense of self disappears
  8. Sense of time is altered
The experience of these is so rewarding that people spend their lives in
search of activities that can cause it. Csikszentmihlyi studies flow using a
survey technique he invented called ESM (experiential sampling method). Over
the course of his experiments he has given thousands of participants beepers
that go off at random times during the day. The participants then record what
they are doing and answer a few questions about how they feel. He found that
the conditions necessary for a task to induce flow are that the task is
challenging but that the agent has the requisite skills to undertake it, and
that as the agent performs the task it remains interesting and provides
feedback so that the agent can experience reward. If the task is too difficult
the agent would feel stressed or anxious and if the task is too easy it would
lead to boredom.

Given this definition of flow an analysis can be made of the cognitive tasks
involved. Most of the eight factors are either specific to the domain of the
task (such as the skills required) or are feelings evoked during the activity.
However, two are directly related to a cognitive ability. The ability to
concentrate on the task and to be deeply involved in it requires _attention_.

William James (1890) gives us the most widely used definition of attention:

> It is the taking possession by the mind, in clear and vivid form, of one out
of what seem several simultaneously possible objects or trains of thought.
Focalization, concentration, of consciousness are of its essence. It implies
withdrawal from some things in order to deal effectively with others, and is a
condition which has a real opposite in the confused, dazed, scatterbrained
state which in French is called distraction, and Zerstreutheit
[absentmindedness] in German. (pg. 403)

This definition, in and of itself, is remarkably similar to that of flow. Flow
in part requires a singular type of attention. If all the right circumstances
are present and attention is engaged then flow happens. Neuroimaging has shown
that attention as a cognitive system is spread through several brain areas,
however higher level attention, also called executive control (not simply
visual attention), is located primarily in the frontal cortex (Miller, E. K.,
Cohen, J. D., 2001). Executive control is the system responsible for planning,
initiating behavior, inhibiting inappropriate responses, abstract thinking,
and attentional selection (Goswami, U., 2008). To be able to focus on
something the mind needs to be able to ignore irrelevant stimuli. During flow
the mind also needs to be able to initiate actions and plan the next move. The
effects of time altering and sense of self that Csikszentmihalyi mentions are
both correlated to this part of the brain as well.

**Is dopamine the cause of flow?**  
It has been shown that the neurotransmitter dopamine is part of the attention
regulation system (Nieoullon, A. 2002). Dopamine is one of the primary
mechanisms in the brain's reward circuit and takes part in the inhibitory part
of executive control (pg. 63). Dopaminergic system deficiencies are often
cited as causing attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and the primary
treatment for ADHD is via drugs such as Ritalin (pg. 57). Ritalin is an
amphetamine derivative and is functionally similar to cocaine (Genetic Science
Learning Center, 2010). Its primary method of action is increasing the levels
of dopamine available in the brain. The principal effect of extra dopamine in
the brain is increased energy and improved attention. However, Ritalin is
often abused not only for the attention enhancing properties but also for the
cocaine like euphoria that can occur at higher doses. Conversely drugs that
treat schizophrenia are dopamine antagonists that by reducing the available
dopamine in the brain also reduce motivation and attention (pg. 72) and even
in some cases prevent all feelings of pleasure (anhedonia) (Surguladze, S. et
all 2002 pg. 451).

There is evidence that dopamine is essential to the mechanisms of creativity,
ideation, and learning. The dopamine pathway increases both arousal and goal-
directedness and at the same time decreases inhibition and suppresses
competing behaviors (Flaherty, A. W., 2005. pg. 149). To confirm the
connection between dopamine and attention, one particular study used Positron
Emission Tomography (PET) scanning -- dopamine receptors were tagged with
radio isotopes and the subjects were asked to perform working memory and
sustained attention tasks. The scans then showed if dopamine receptors were
activated during the tasks and in which brain areas (Aalto, S., Bruck, A.,
Laine,M., Någren, K., Rinne, J. O., 2005). One of the brain mechanisms
involved in all of this is a brain circuit that senses expected and unexpected
rewards and then signals (via dopamine) that we should learn from them (Arias-
Carrión, O.; Pöppel, E. 2007, pg. 486). This system is responsible for not
only gambling addictions but also for much of our unconscious goal-directed
motivation (pg. 484). For instance the dopamine reward and attention circuit
has also been shown to be integral in game playing (Koepp,M.J. et al. 1998).

It would be an oversimplification to say that dopamine alone was responsible
for all the feelings associated with flow. It is, however, fair to say that it
is strongly implicated given its crucial role in attention regulation, reward
and learning. This would suggest that flow is really those moments when the
brain is in a highly attentive state, when it is being rewarded constantly for
each action, and when it is learning at each of those reward moments. What
Csikszentmihalyi is offering in his book is a methodology for creating the
right circumstances to help facilitate this continuous cycle of
expectation/reward/learning that is suggested by the dopamine connection.

**Is education a practical application for flow theory?**  
It is no wonder given the power of flow that Csikszentmihalyi has also turned
his attention to studying flow in educational settings. One of the essential
parts of flow is that the activity is _autotelic_, that is has intrinsic
motivation in and of itself (Csikszentmihalyi, M., 1990, pg. 67). Usually we
start an activity because of an external goal, however as we continue that
activity there is the possibility of starting to enjoy it for its own sake.
That is one of the preconditions for flow and it is also evident in the
learning patterns of toddlers -- for instance a child after just starting to
read will read everything in sight (pg. 130). However in the typical school
system flow is hindered by many factors: the distractions of the classroom,
the uneven skill level of the class, the anxiety inducing difficulty of
certain subjects and the boring simplicity of others. Therein lies the
difficulty of the educational system, how to teach unwilling unmotivated
students material that is either too hard or too easy in a setting that is
distracting.

Csikszentmihalyi proposes that the techniques of flow be used. His first
proposal is that students be given the initial extrinsic motivation by
example. Teachers who enjoy what they do most often have students who also
want that same enjoyment (pg. 133). Given a positive model, the next step is
to match the difficulty of the material with the abilities of the students. In
a large classroom this is a challenge that does not have a ready solution.
Finally, feedback needs to be immediate and learning tasks organized in
attainable steps (pg. 131). Eric Jensen (1995) has this message for teachers:

> Teaching in a way that encourages students to reach the flow state may be
one of the most important roles you have. In this state, learners are highly
internally motivated, and learning becomes enjoyable. Help learners reach flow
by setting up favorable conditions for it. [...] learning will likely be
stifled by a rigid structure. Keep challenge high but stress low. Let learners
set the pace while you provide the support. Have them design a complex project
that is personally relevant, and then vary the resources to keep the task
appropriate to their ability levels. Make it exciting; use teams, simulations,
technology, and deadlines while maintaining the appropriate levels of guidance
[...] (pg. 137).

Hektner and Csikszentmihalyi (1996) say that "in order to maintain the
enjoyment of flow, people must continually engage in new challenges to match
their increasing skills, and they must perfect their skills to meet the
challenges" (p. 4). Csikszentmihalyi then proposes that some of the biggest
_dangers_ to flow are an overemphasis on rules, evaluation, focus on
competition and the ensuing self-consciousness that arises from that
(Csikszentmihalyi, M., 1990, pg. 137). These unfortunately are staples in many
educational systems. Jensen (1995) goes so far as to call these methods _brain
antagonistic_ in his practical book on brain-based teaching (pg. xiii).

It is at this point that dopamine enters the picture. As schools struggle with
students' attentional problems, pharmaceutical companies and modern psychiatry
have provided the answer in the form of dopamine increasing drugs. In 2005, 29
million prescriptions for Ritalin and related drugs were written, nearly 80
percent of them for children (Pettus, A., 2006). Regardless of whether ADHD
medications are over-prescribed or not, it is obvious that a problem exists.

There have been followup studies into flow and learning (Egbert, J., 2003)
showing that flow can exist in classroom settings and that it can be used to
achieve higher rates of self reported interest and energy (Rathunde, K.,
Csikszentmihalyi, M., 2005). In a comparison study of learning states in
traditional versus Montessori schools, Csikszentmihalyi found that optimal
experience (a term used to describe a positive, flow-inducing, learning state)
leads to more _undivided_ interest in the material by the students (pg. 506).
A case may thus be made that flow techniques should be further studied not
only in the context of enhancing the school experience, but that innovative
methodology may be used to alleviate some of the need for amphetamines in
schools.

In 1933, John Dewey suggested that the best state of mind for learning is one
that is "playful and serious at the same time" (p. 286). Today one can
certainly imagine an educational setting where: the material is custom
tailored to each student's ability level, the teacher enjoys the material, and
in which the student, excited to learn, can engage with the material fully to
the point of losing track of time. In a traditional classroom this still seems
difficult to accomplish, even with all the techniques that Csikszentmihalyi
(2005) and Jensen (1995) mention. However there is no technological barrier to
design a system in which students learn through a technology (in a system that
automatically adjusts for difficulty like the one employed by the GRE test)
such that their minds can be optimally activated. Brain antagonistic models of
learning have shown themselves to be problematic at best and in the search for
a new methodology perhaps flow theory can provide some insight into the
problem of attention and motivation in students.

The correlation between flow and dopamine shows us an area ready for further
exploration. If the techniques of flow elicit a type of dopamine high, then
studying these methods may provide answers to attentional disorders. This can
also drive the realization that the mechanisms behind creative passion are
similar to the mechanisms of cocaine addiction, and that can perhaps help find
answers to what pushes people toward one or the other or both. Learning can
and should be _joyful_ (Wolk, S., 2008) and _addicting_, flow and dopamine
shows us a way to make it so.


________________


References: 

Aalto, S., Bruck, A., Laine, M., Nagren, K., & Rinne, J. O.
(2005). Frontal and temporal dopamine release during working memory and
attention tasks in healthy humans: A positron emission tomography study using
the high-affinity dopamine D2 receptor ligand [11C]FLB 457. Journal of
Neuroscience, 25(10), 2471-2477. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2097-04.2005

Arias-Carrión, O., & Pöppel, E. (2007). Dopamine, learning and reward-seeking
behavior. Acta Neurobiol Exp, 67(4), 481-488.

Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Literacy and intrinsic motivation. Daedalus,
119(2, Literacy in America), 115-140. Retrieved from
http://www.jstor.org/stable/20025303

Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1991; 1990). Flow :The psychology of optimal experience.
New York: HarperPerennial.

Dewey, J. (1933). How we think. D. C. Heath, Boston.

Egbert, J. (2003). A study of flow theory in the foreign language classroom.
The Modern Language Journal, 87(4), 499-518. doi:10.1111/1540-4781.00204

Flaherty, A. W. (2005). Frontotemporal and dopaminergic control of idea
generation and creative drive. The Journal of Comparative Neurology, 493(1),
147-153. doi:10.1002/cne.20768

Genetic Science Learning Center. (2010, March 10). Ritalin and cocaine: The
connection and the controversy. Retrieved March 10, 2010, from
http://learn.genetics.utah.edu/content/addiction/issues/ritalin.html

Goswami, U. (2008). Cognitive development: The learning brain New York, NY,
US: Psychology Press.

Hektner, J., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1996). A longitudinal exploration of flow
and intrinsic motivation in adolescents. Paper presented at the annual meeting
of the American Educational Research Association, New York.

James, W. (1981). The principles of psychology. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press.

Jensen, E. (2008). Brain-based learning :The new paradigm of teaching (2nd
ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA.: Corwin Press.

Koepp, M. J., Gunn, R. N., Lawrence, A. D., Cunningham, V. J., Dagher, A.,
Jones, T., et al. (1998). Evidence for striatal dopamine release during a
video game. Nature, 393(6682), 266-268. Retrieved from
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/30498

Miller, E. K., & Cohen, J. D. (2001). An integrative theory of prefrontal
cortex function. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 24(1), 167-202. Retrieved from
http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.24.1.167

Morgan, H. (2004). Real learning :A bridge to cognitive neuroscience (1st
ed.). Lanham, Md.: ScarecrowEducation.

Nieoullon, A. (2002). Dopamine and the regulation of cognition and attention.
Progress in Neurobiology, 67(1), 53-83. doi:DOI: 10.1016/S0301-0082(02)00011-4

Pettus, A. (2006, July-August 2006). Psychiatry By prescription: Do
psychotropic drugs blur the boundaries between illness and health? Harvard
Magazine. Retrieved from http://harvardmagazine.com/2006/07/psychiatry-by-
prescripti.html

Posner, M. I., & Petersen, S. E. (1990). The attention system of the human
brain. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 13(1), 25-42. Retrieved from http://arjo
urnals.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/annurev.ne.13.030190.000325

Rathunde, K., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2005). Middle school students'
motivation and quality of experience: A comparison of montessori and
traditional school environments. American Journal of Education, 111(3),
341-371. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/3566831

Schiefele, U., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1995). Motivation and ability as
factors in mathematics experience and achievement. Journal for Research in
Mathematics Education, 26(2), 163-181. Retrieved from
http://www.jstor.org/stable/749208

Surguladze, S., Keedwell, P., & Phillips, M. (2003). Neural systems underlying
affective disorders. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 9(6), 446-455.
doi:10.1192/apt.9.6.446

Wise, R. A. (2004). Dopamine, learning and motivation. Nature Reviews.
Neuroscience, 5(6), 483-494. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrn1406

Wolk, S. (2008, September 2008). Joy in school. Educational Leadership, 66,
8-15. Retrieved from http://www.ascd.org/publications/educational_leadership/s
ept08/vol66/num01/Joy_in_School.aspx

